# Unmarked-abundance-validation
Code for JAE submission: "An overview and validation of statistical techniques to estimate abundance of unmarked animals from camera trap data"

## Abstract 
1.	Estimating animal abundance is critical to understanding and protecting wildlife populations. Camera trap surveys are a popular wildlife monitoring technique and numerous methods exist for estimating densities of individually-recognizable (‘marked’) animals from camera trap counts. ‘Unmarked’ animals are a frequent focus of camera trap studies, yet the applicability of common density estimation analyses to species lacking individual recognition is poorly understood.
2.	We compare the equivalency, precision, and reliability of density estimates calculated using random encounter models (REMs), N-mixture models, and unmarked spatially-explicit capture-recapture (SECR) models to aerial survey estimates for seven unmarked large herbivore species. These models require only camera trap counts and basic parameters (e.g., such as would be rapidly generated by citizen science or machine learning). We calculated densities using our entire dataset as well as spatial and temporal subsets that were disaggregated to reduce bias. 
3.	All models generated density estimates that overlapped with aerial estimates. Those produced by SECR models and REMs were the most equivalent and precise. Within several data subsets, both of these approaches generated strong 1:1 relationships between derived and aerial density estimates. N-mixture models produced estimates with large confidence intervals, rendering them less useful for practitioners. 
4.	Each model performed differently on species that varied in body, group, and home range-size. Using data subsets improved model estimates relative to using all available data. 
5.	Synthesis and applications. We demonstrate that practitioners can produce reasonable estimates of unmarked large herbivore densities using accessible SECR and REM models and basic camera trap data. This enables ecologists to derive key wildlife population parameters on timescales short enough to respond to perturbations and conservation interventions. To improve accessibility of these methods to a broad audience, we include a non-technical introduction to each technique 
and discuss the advantages and limitations of these methods in camera trap studies. 
